In this section of the Shahnama, Kaykhursau has just ascended to the throne. He has
given Tus the role of commander of his army on the condition that he take
them to Turan and capture Afrasiyab to avenge his father. A questionable decision on Kaykhusrau's part
given that Tus was one of the few characters who protested his rise in power.
Kaykhusrau specified that Tus was to avoid travelling through Kalat because his stepbrother, the great
warrior Farud, lives there with his mother, Jarireh, but Tus had his own agenda...
Farud had previously fought against Tus' army, killing Tus' son, Zarasp, and son-in-law, Rivniz in
the process. Consumed with anger, Tus led his troops to the fortress, disregarding Kaykhursau's orders.
Tus was given some lemons when Kaykhusrau allowed him to remain as commander despite his
behavior in the past, but instead of making lemonade, he has left them to rot
by taking his position for granted and disobeying his king. Revenge is a terrible thing.
Upon seeing the army on its way to the fortress, Farud says to his mother
that he is prepared to die but will give the fight his all no matter
the consequences. He is brave, but a realist. She is concerned and heavy-hearted.
Tus says to his men before the battle, "I will send up this hold's
dust to the sun. To avenge beloved Zarasp, the cavalier, I will attack without delay.
I will make this Turkman wretch a corpse, and with his gore engrain the stones
like coral to the core..." Tus is fighting solely for revenge, Farud is fighting
because he must...
Farud and his forces hold off Tus' army for much of the battle, but unfortunately
Jarireh's worries were warranted after all. Farud takes notice that his army has thinned and
decides to escape into the fortress to rally his troops and rest. His noble effort
to race back was thwarted by an ambush by two of Tus' most experienced warriors:
the heroes Ruhham and Bizhan. Two on one is no fair fight, not even
for a legendary warrior.
Depicted in the illustration is the moment Ruhham pierces Farud's shoulder, disabling his ability to
wield a sword and mortally wounding him. Bizhan sits on his horse on the left
side, preventing Farud's safe passage along the uneven ground. After crying out in pain, Farud
despterately makes his way around them and into the castle, nearly knocking Bizhan out with
a smack to the head on the way. The gate quickly shuts behind him.
Now, having escaped the battlefield, Farud lays on his ivory throne, bleeding out, whispering his
last words: "Let all whose hearts and cheeks burn for my life, go fling
themselves down from the battlements that none may be the portion of Bizhan. I'll follow
soon because he severeth my blameless life and is, in this day of youth, my
death.
To spare herself from further pain, Jarireh proceeded to burn all the treasures and commit
suicide.
The servants followed by jumping off the castle walls as instructed by Farud.
Once Tus, Bizhan and Ruhham entered the fortress, they were appalled at what they saw.
Farud and his forces had fought bravely, but no one could have expected this contingency
plan to be enforced once he had retreated. Tus knew he had made a huge
mistake, and that the consequences when Kaykhursau found out would be dire.